KEP-5027 + 5055: DRA: admin-controlled device attributes + taints (#5034)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-node/5027-dra-admin-controlled-device-attributes/README.md

administrators, can use to override or extend that information. This can be
permanent as part of the installation of a DRA driver to adapt the driver to
the cluster or temporary as part of cluster maintenance.

This generic mechanism can be used to mark devices as offline, regardless
whether it is because of device health as observed by some component other than
the driver itself or because the cluster administrator is doing some manual
maintenance work.

The other usage is to influence which devices are picked when there are
multiple viable alternatives. This is a first step towards providing a more
comprehensive [scoring](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/4970)
solution.

For both usages this KEP standardizes device attributes that need to be checked
by the scheduler before using a device for a ResourceClaim.

## Motivation

### Goals

- Enable [admin-controlled](../5055-dra-device-taints-and-tolerations) device taints.

- Enable updating how devices are seen in the cluster without having to use
  driver-specific APIs which influence what a driver puts into ResourceSlices.

### Non-Goals

- At least for alpha: extend `kubectl` to provide a unified view of devices

>   together with all overrides that apply to them.

Author: @eero-t in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/5034#pullrequestreview-2562581352
> There was earlier discussion of common (driver independent) tool(ing) for listing, adding and removing device taints. Would it make sense to mention something about that in the tainting KEP?

I added this here for attributes and in the other KEP for taints.

Author: See https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/5034/files#r1923530521 for more details.

by the scheduler before using a device for a ResourceClaim.

## Motivation

### Goals

- Enable preventing usage of certain devices without having to reconfigure the
  DRA driver.

- Enable configuring a cluster where some devices are local and others are
  attached via some fabric such that local devices are preferred by the
  scheduler (https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/124042#issuecomment-2550962390).

### Non-Goals

- A complete scoring solution which also considers also user preferences
  and picks the "best" device.

## Proposal

The intent to override device attributes must be recorded persistently so that
it is preserved even when a ResourceSlice gets removed or updated. To achieve
this, a new cluster-scoped ResourceSliceOverride type gets added. A single
ResourceSliceOverride object specifies device attributes that apply to all
devices matching a CEL expression, i.e. the same way as users select devices in
a ResourceClaim.

The scheduler must merge these additional attributes with the ones provided by
the DRA drivers. The "kubernetes.io/offline" string attribute contains a
free-form explanation why the device is not currently available. Such a device

> must be ignored by the scheduler. The "kubernetes.io/priority" integer defines

Author: @eero-t asked in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5027#issuecomment-2586754617:

> How admin should run test workload(s) on device which scheduling has been disabled (e.g. for firmware upgrade), to know whether it can be enabled egain (for production workloads)?
>
> With node taints, one would use taint tolerance for this, but I don't seem from KEP description how similar thing would be achieved for DRA devices.

This is indeed not possible as described here. How about making it configurable whether an offline device is used?

The "normal" DeviceClass that users should pick for production workloads could have a selector which excludes offline devices.

Then there is a second DeviceClass which doesn't exclude them. There's nothing that would prevent users from using that, but if they do, they do at their own risk. This is on-par with node taints.

Reviewer: It's not enough to select all offline devices, as there can be multiple reasons for offline, e.g. health and administration => selection would need to be specific to given offline reason, and not match if there are other reasons.

(With taints, one could use e.g. `fw-upgrade` taint, and its toleration.   While one could still taint whole nodes, that could be rather disruptive, whereas by offlining devices one-by-one, upgrades would cause only slight service degradation while they are being performed & tested/verified.)

Author: The admin can create a custom DeviceClass with a selector which matches exactly the reason they chose when taking the device offline. The ResourceSliceOverride then has `kubernetes.io/offline: fw-upgrade` and the workload's DeviceClass has `device.attributes["kubernetes.io"].offline == "fw-upgrade"`.

But that doesn't cover the case where manually created ResourceSliceOverride contains such a `kubernetes.io/offline: fw-upgrade` and another, automatically created one has `kubernetes.io/offline: unhealthy`. The admin can make sure that "its" value wins via resourcesliceoverride.spec.rank, but then the `kubernetes.io/offline: unhealthy` gets lost.

We could specify a different merging strategy for this well-known attribute: instead of keeping exactly one entry, the different instances could be numbered, leading to ``kubernetes.io/offline: fw-upgrade; kubernetes.io/offline-1: unhealthy`. The CEL expressions become a bit more complex, but it would work.

Yet another alternative is to extend the CEL environment so that `device.attributes["kubernetes.io"].offline` is a list of strings. This might be better than the value name "hack".

Reviewer 2: Thanks to the KEP. And sorry to cut-in this discussion. I'm curious in the usecase of expossing the device health via `ResourceSliceOverride`.

In this usecase, are there any ideas how could online/offline status changes affect to _running_ workloads?? In this case, it might be useful for users to introduce device level toleration for more flexible control? 

This is just a juvenile suggestion(it definitely needs more consideration):

```yaml
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: ResourceClaim 
spec:
  devices:
    requests:
    - name: gpu
      deviceClassName: gpu.nvidia.com
      tolerations:  # New field
      - cel:
          expression: "device.attributes["kubernetes.io"].offline != ""
        effect: NoExecute | NoSchedule
        tolerationSeconds: 30s # this is effective only when 'NoExecute'
```

Author: Reacting to `offline` on the node for a running workload is currently out-of-scope, but I can see how it would be useful to do something even if that means making the ResourceClaim API more complex. It also means that the kubelet needs to become aware of this because a controller cannot force containers to stop, can it?

We could start without it in 1.33, then add such an API in 1.34 (still as alpha!).

Reviewer 2: > Reacting to offline on the node for a running workload is currently out-of-scope

Understood. Shall we state this in the KEP??

> but I can see how it would be useful to do something even if that means making the ResourceClaim API more complex

👍 

> It also means that the kubelet needs to become aware of this because a controller cannot force containers to stop, can it?

However, IIUC, node taints are controlled by　"taint-eviction-controller" in "controller-manager", so I first imagined the DRA controller could potentially handle this.

> We could start without it in 1.33, then add such an API in 1.34 (still as alpha!).

Sounds Cool!! I'm also looking forward to discussing this enhancement details :-).

Author: > Shall we state this in the KEP??

Something needs to be in the KEP about this: either that it is currently out-of-scope or how something works that is in scope. I'm still trying to find out what's possible :sweat_smile: 

> node taints are controlled by "taint-eviction-controller" in "controller-manager"

I need to look into that. Such a solution would be much better than having the kubelet do it. We want to support new features with old kubelet versions (version skew) and in general keep the kubelet as dumb as possible.

Author: The relevant code in the taint-eviction controller is  https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/2d0a4f75560154454682b193b42813159b20f284/pkg/controller/tainteviction/taint_eviction.go#L129-L147 

As I suspected, there is no separate API which causes a pod to stop. It has to be deleted, which then causes kubelet to stop containers and call the driver's NodeUnprepareResources. The downside (?) is that once it has stopped, the pod object is also going to get removed. But perhaps that's the behavior that we want?

Author: API design question: should apps explicitly have to opt into eviction?

In other words, if this new `tolerations` is empty, should the default behavior be this:
```
      tolerations:  
      - cel:
          expression: "device.attributes["kubernetes.io"].offline != ""
        effect: NoSchedule
```

My preference is to not actually make that a default in the apiserver, i.e. if the field is empty, it remains empty when stored. The benefit is that if the default changes, the new implicit default will be used for existing objects instead of being forced to use the old default because it is in the stored object and might have been chosen by the user explicitly.

Another API design aspect: being able to format a message with CEL in case that the toleration triggers seems useful.

Author: > Although I'm not familiar with the ResourceClaim lifecycle so much, I imagined that when a scheduled pod with some ResourceClaims was deleted, the devices bound to the ResouceClaims were also unbound.

That's correct. But devices also get deallocated when its consuming pod(s) are in a known final state where it won't run any containers anymore, so it's not necessary to fully remove a pod to reuse devices. The advantage would be that one can still retrieve logs or inspect the pod object to determine what it did (exit code, termination message). I just don't see how an external controller can force a pod into that state, so we would have to go the same route as node tainting.

> > API design question: should apps explicitly have to opt into eviction?
> I originally supposed: [...]

I think we can define `device.attributes["kubernetes.io"].offline != ""` as a check that, if true, means that the device cannot and/or should not be used. With that definition, not scheduling and evicting running pods seem like the right default behavior if a ResourceClaim doesn't list tolerations.

Reviewer 2: > But devices also get deallocated when its consuming pod(s) are in a known final state where it won't run any containers anymore, so it's not necessary to fully remove a pod to reuse devices. The advantage would be that one can still retrieve logs or inspect the pod object to determine what it did (exit code, termination message)

Got it. That makes sense.

> I just don't see how an external controller can force a pod into that state, so we would have to go the same route as node tainting.

I agree because there is no such apis (make pods reach final state forcefully) as you stated.

> I think we can define device.attributes["kubernetes.io"].offline != "" as a check that, if true, means that the device cannot and/or should not be used. With that definition, not scheduling and evicting running pods seem like the right default behavior if a ResourceClaim doesn't list tolerations.

Yeah. That's simpler than introducing taints.

It's my pros/cons analysis:
- Unhealthiness via device attributes (e.g. `kubernetes.io/offline`):
  - Pros:
    - Simple (just adding toleration in ResourceClaim)
  - Cons:
    - User(`ResourceClaim`) should aware which attributes define its device unhealthiness to define thieir toleration. These should be documented in DRA driver documents
- Unhealthiness via `taints` (in `ResourceSlice`(by DRA Driver) or `ResoruceSliceOverride`(by admin or external controller))
  - Pros:
    - User(`ResourceClaim`) can follow standard taint/toleration semantics
    - _taints can express its abnormal usecase, i.e. default (in case no tolerations) behavior, via `effect`_ (`NoSchedule | NoExecute | PreferNoSchedule | etc.` for each failure/offline mode
      - `offline=suspect-failure:PreferNoSchedule`
      - `offline=investigation:NoSchedule`
      - `offline=fw-upgrade:NoSchedule` and `offline=fw-upgrade:NoExecute`
      - `offline=hardware-failure:NoSchedule` and `offline=hardware-failure:NoExecute`
  - Cons:
    - Complex
    - Even in this case, user(`ResourceClaim`) should aware which taint key/value are exposed by DRA driver to define tolerations. That should be documented in DRA driver documents.

Hmm. It's actually difficult for me to choose which is better. I personally incline standard taint/toleration a little bit. But I'm worry about the API complexity.

WDYT??

Author: I had already put something into the KEP under alternatives about using fields instead of pre-defined attribute names. The original argument was that it would be a small step from having this override mechanism to standardizing some attributes for specific purposes.

But that argument is starting to break down: for `kubernetes.io/offline` we would already need special merging that combines all values in a list of strings, and one half of the API would be a pre-defined attribute name while the other half are fields (`ResourceClaim.Spec.Tolerations`).

I'm leaning towards dropping `kubernetes.io/offline` and replacing it with a "proper" API. It still fits into this KEP because it relies on `ResourceSliceOverride`.

Reviewer 2: > I had already put something into the KEP under alternatives about using fields instead of pre-defined attribute names.

Oh, thanks for the clarification. I found it in Alterhatives section 🙇 

> I'm leaning towards dropping kubernetes.io/offline and replacing it with a "proper" API. 
👍 

> It still fits into this KEP because it relies on ResourceSliceOverride.

Honestly, I think it depends on what kind of "proper" API design will be agreed. IF the agreed API WAS taint/toleration in ResourceSlice(Override)/ResourceClaim, then I prefer to this in separate KEP to isolate the intention even though it relies on ResourceSliceOverride because taint/toleration can work without ResourceSliceOverride. WDYT??

Author: You may be right. But it's tricky to have two separate KEPs in-flight at the same time. What if someone disables DRAAdminControlledDeviceAttributes (this KEP) and enables DRADeviceTaints (some new KEP)? Is that a valid setup? Perhaps... the device taint could be stored in the ResourceSlice, just not in the ResourceSliceOverride, because that's disabled.

Okay, let me try two different KEPs.

Author: I think I'll leave out `kubernetes.io/priority`. The same argument against having device health with taints here apply to it, too (separate feature!), and with the increased complexity of device taints I don't want to bite of more than I (and my reviewers) can chew in this release cycle.

Author: I've pushed an update which includes what was discussed above. As GitHub will now treat this discussion thread as "obsolete", let me suggest that we continue the discussion in new threads attached to the updated texts where appropriate.

In other words, please review :smile:

    // device, otherwise the override is ignore for it.
    // All selectors must be satisfied.
    //
    // +optional
    // +listType=atomic
    Selectors []DeviceSelector

    // If a ResourceSlice and a DeviceOverride define the same attribute or
    // capacity, the value of the DeviceOverride is used. If multiple
    // different DeviceOverrides match the same device, then the one with
    // the highest rank wins. If the ranks are the same, it is non-deterministic
    // which override is used.
    Rank int

    // Attributes defines the set of attributes to override for matching devices.
    // The name of each attribute must be unique in that set and
    // include the domain prefix.
    //
    // The maximum number of attributes and capacities combined is 32.
    //
    // +optional
    Attributes map[FullyQualifiedName]DeviceAttribute

    // Capacity defines the set of capacities to override for matching devices.
    // The name of each capacity must be unique in that set and
    // include the domain prefix.
    //
    // The maximum number of attributes and capacities combined is 32.
    //
    // +optional
    Capacity map[QualifiedName]DeviceCapacity
}

> // AttributeNamePriority is a standardized attribute name. Its value must be an integer.

Author: Or this?

```suggestion
// AttributeNamePriority is a attribute name defined by Kubernetes. Its value must be an integer.
```

/cc @johnbelamaric

Major milestones might include:
- the `Summary` and `Motivation` sections being merged, signaling SIG acceptance
- the `Proposal` section being merged, signaling agreement on a proposed design
- the date implementation started
- the first Kubernetes release where an initial version of the KEP was available
- the version of Kubernetes where the KEP graduated to general availability
- when the KEP was retired or superseded
-->

## Drawbacks

<!--
Why should this KEP _not_ be implemented?
-->

## Alternatives

Instead of standardized attributes, top-level fields could be introduced. But
the ability to override all kinds of attributes may be useful by itself.  Once
that is implemented, adding attributes with special semantic is simpler than
dedicated fields.

Instead of ResourceSliceOverride as a separate type, new fields in the
ResourceSlice status could be modified by an admin. That has the problem that
the ResourceSlice object might get deleted while doing cluster maintenance like
a driver update, in which case the admin intent would get lost. A driver would
not be able to publish a new ResourceSlice where a device is immediately marked

> as offline because creating a ResourceSlice strips the status.

Reviewer 2: JFYI:

@johnbelamaric suggested drop-in file style to overide/extend device attributes [here](https://github.com/NVIDIA/k8s-dra-driver/issues/213#issuecomment-2590526324):
> I also think it could be useful for the driver (actually, the base driver framework that we would prefer all drivers to use) to have a hook to allow VM architects to augment the device attributes published by the driver.
> 
> For example, dropping a file on the node that can tell you which external network each NIC is plumbed to.
> 
> Patrick's KEP gives the cluster admin an opportunity to enhance attributes. That could be sufficient to do what I am saying. But it may also be helpful to have an on-node way of doing this.

Author: If DRA driver authors want to support a way of doing this, then they certainly can. But I don't think we as Kubernetes should standardize and require supporting such a feature. If we want to offer a common API, then this KEP looks like a better approach to me, in particular because accessing the apiserver is easier than creating files on nodes...

Reviewer 2: > If we want to offer a common API, then this KEP looks like a better approach to me, in particular because accessing the apiserver is easier than creating files on nodes...

I also support the ResourceSliceOverride approach. Although drop-in might fit with node-local devices, DRA can now support broader device models, e.g. non-node-local devices (i.e. fabric-attached devices).
